---
layout: post
title: "Contribution to the 25th SEA meeting (Spanish Society of Astronomy)"
date: 2023-09-05 12:00:00 +01:00
categories: conference
---

# SEA 22 meeting

The XV meeting of SEA was held in La Laguna (Canary Islands, Spain) from Sep 5th to 9th, 2022. Our group presented two contributions.

- R Baena-Gallé, TM Girard, DI Casetti-Dinescu, M Martone. Astrometric Centering of WFPC2/HST images with Deep Learning. Highlights of Spanish Astrophysics XI.

Abstract:

Archival WFPC2/HST exposures hold great potential for proper motion studies. Up to now, the astrometric precision of WFPC2 images is limited to∼ 20 mpix as these are the most undersampled images from the various HST optical imagers. We explore deep-learning techniques, specifically, Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) algorithms, to implicitly model the PSF and determine stars centers. The method is tested on HST images and the resulting astrometric precision is compared to that obtained with traditional, state-of-the-art centering algorithms. This approach is data-driven as the behaviour of CNNs is not based on a predefined PSF, rather it is based on estimating the stars’ center positions directly from pixel intensity values in the images. We present the description of the CNN architecture, data preprocessing, and learning strategy together with preliminary results from simulated WFPC2 data.

- L Guirado-Fuentes, R Baena-Gallé. Analysis of Kepler light curves using the wavelet transform to discriminate with machine learning the astrophysical nature of the eclipsing object. Highlights of Spanish Astrophysics XI

Abstract:

The Kepler mission has been the most successful so far in the search and characterization of exoplanets by transit. With this technique, the intensity of light emitted by the star is measured at regular intervals to detect periodically recurring photometric reductions, from which the presence of an object can be inferred. We introduce an approach to analyse light curves by using the Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) for exoplanet classification. Our method consists of four stages. Firstly, light curves are phase folded distinguishing odd and even events. Secondly, a symlet 5 DWT is applied to the resulting curves creating up to
wavelet scales. Thirdly, noise filtering is applied to high-frequency scales. Finally, statistical features from the reconstructed curves are extracted by means of tsfresh. This information is used to perform supervised classification (LightGBM and AutoSklearn methods) as well as unsupervised statistical …

- Hernández-Afonso, J., & Baena-Gallé, R. (2023). Deep Learning for Artifact Removal in Galaxy Images. Highlights of Spanish Astrophysics XI, 393.

Abstract

In astronomical image acquisition, it is common to find artifacts and anomalies due to the particularities of the studied objects as well as the acquisition process. Two of these aberrations are, firstly, an object random light distribution that is usually modeled with a Poisson distribution, and, secondly, the loss of spatial resolution due to the optical and atmospheric point spread function (PSF). Motivated by the recent advances in the field of Deep Learning in image reconstruction, we have built a solution based on convolutional neural network (CNN) for astronomic image aberrations removal. Our model is based on architectures with auto-encoders to extract fundamental image features, skip-connections to recover lost features during the compression stage, and two branches in parallel to perform the reconstruction task at different levels of resolution. Our results over simulations of galaxy images show an improvement of up to $8 $ dB in PSNR, and an increasement from ...
 
---

Proceedings: https://www.sea-astronomia.es/publicaciones/proceeding
